Add customised DSP RTL code to use_library sample (#3)
juny-lim/oneAPI-samples-fork: DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/Tutorials/Tools/use_library/README.md

Reviewer: please add an entry to DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md

This FPGA tutorial demonstrates how to build SYCL device libraries from RTL sources and use them in your SYCL design.

| Area                  | Description
|:---                   |:---
| What you will learn   | How to integrate Verilog directly into your oneAPI program and emulate it using a C model, as well as pulling the RTL directly into your full system design.
| Time to complete      | 30 minutes
| Category              | Concepts and Functionality
## Purpose

This FPGA tutorial demonstrates how to build SYCL device libraries from RTL sources and use them in your SYCL design. An RTL library is useful for embedding high performance FPGA code, handwritten in Verilog into your oneAPI program.

> ## Prerequisites

Reviewer: ```suggestion

## Prerequisites
```

| What you will learn   | How to integrate Verilog directly into your oneAPI program and emulate it using a C model, as well as pulling the RTL directly into your full system design.
| Time to complete      | 30 minutes
| Category              | Concepts and Functionality
## Purpose

This FPGA tutorial demonstrates how to build SYCL device libraries from RTL sources and use them in your SYCL design. An RTL library is useful for embedding high performance FPGA code, handwritten in Verilog into your oneAPI program.

## Prerequisites
| Optimized for                     | Description
|:---                               |:---
| OS                                | CentOS* Linux 8 <br> Red Hat* Enterprise Linux* 8 <br> SUSE* Linux Enterprise Server 15 <br> Ubuntu* 18.04 LTS <br> Ubuntu 20.04 <br>Windows* 10
| Hardware                          | Intel® Agilex® 7, Arria® 10, and Stratix® 10 FPGAs
| Software                          | Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler

> **Note**: Even though the Intel DPC++/C++ OneAPI compiler is enough to compile for emulation, generating reports and generating RTL, there are extra software requirements for the simulation flow and FPGA compiles.

> >

Reviewer: is the issue on line 33 resolved:

> :warning: When targeting an IP-only flow, the RTL library feature will not work when compiling to Quartus and will error out in the late-stage compile. RTL libraries will work in the simulation flow. This will be fixed in a future release. This is documented in the [compiler release notes](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/developer/articles/release-notes/intel-oneapi-dpc-c-compiler-release-notes.html).

Reviewer 2: Yes, and it has been removed in the development branch already: https://github.com/oneapi-src/oneAPI-samples/commit/07350128de3ffb42ac09c62fce11dd66993437fc

Author: remove the outdated issue in latest commit

Find more information about how to navigate this part of the code samples in the [FPGA top-level README.md](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md).
You can also find more information about [troubleshooting build errors](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#troubleshooting), [running the sample on the Intel® DevCloud](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#build-and-run-the-samples-on-intel-devcloud-optional), [using Visual Studio Code with the code samples](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#use-visual-studio-code-vs-code-optional), [links to selected documentation](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#documentation), etc.

### Use of RTL libraries in SYCL

> 

Reviewer: let's use this graphic from the documentation:

https://www.intel.com/content/dam/docs/us/en/programming-guide/2023-2/A94E9326-A43F-4E75-8326-182E541808D4-low.png

Files needed to create a SYCL target library from RTL source include:
- Verilog, System Verilog, or VHDL files that define the RTL component
- An Object Manifest File (.xml) which contains properties needed to integrate RTL component into SYCL pipeline
- A header file containing valid SYCL kernel language and declares the signatures of functions implemented by the RTL component.
- A SYCL based emulation model file for RTL component

The RTL is used when compiling for hardware whereas the emulation model is used when the oneAPI program is run on the FPGA emulator.
After having created the library file, the function in the library can be called from the SYCL kernel, without the need to know the hardware design or implementation details on underlying functions in the library.

> Given a workable RTL module, one may need to apply some modifications in order to integrate it into oneAPI program.

Reviewer: A full list of constraints is available in the documentation, please link to it.

https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/oneapi/programming-guide/2023-2/restrictions-and-limitations-in-rtl-support.html

Find more information about how to navigate this part of the code samples in the [FPGA top-level README.md](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md).
You can also find more information about [troubleshooting build errors](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#troubleshooting), [running the sample on the Intel® DevCloud](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#build-and-run-the-samples-on-intel-devcloud-optional), [using Visual Studio Code with the code samples](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#use-visual-studio-code-vs-code-optional), [links to selected documentation](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#documentation), etc.

### Source Code Description

We have 2 design in this tutorial, each lies in separate sub-folders. Both are taking two 27-bit inputs and perform multiplier to produce a 54-bit output.
With RTL module, we are able to customize DSP block behaviour in SYCL application and observe the impact on area utilization and performance.
In `part1_native` folder, we perform 27x27 multiplier with a native math implemation. This is the normal SYCL application we usually implemetion for FPGA application

> in `part2_libfunc_call` folder, we implement customised DSP block behaviour with a RTL-libary and use it in our SYCL application to perform 27x27 multiplier. Files needed are explained in [Use of RTL libraries in SYCL](#Use-of-RTL-libraries-in-SYCL).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial includes two designs, each in separate sub-directories. Both designs multiply two 27-bit inputs together to produce a 54-bit output. In `part1_native`, a 27x27 multiplication is described with native C++ code. 
In `part2_libfunc_call` folder, RTL code is used to customize a DSP block to perform the multiplication more optimally. You can observe the impact on area utilization and performance by comparing the two designs.
```

> The graphical illustrated the Library Toolchain Creation Process:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This graphic illustrates the Library Toolchain Creation Process:
```

![](assets/lib_toolchain.svg)

### Use of RTL libraries in SYCL

Files needed to create a SYCL target library from RTL source (as demostrated in `part2_libfunc_call` folder) include:
- Verilog, System Verilog, or VHDL files that define the RTL component
- An Object Manifest File (.xml) which contains properties needed to integrate RTL component into SYCL pipeline
- A header file containing valid SYCL kernel language and declares the signatures of functions implemented by the RTL component.
- A SYCL based emulation model file for RTL component

> The RTL is used when compiling for hardware whereas the emulation model is used when the oneAPI program is run on the FPGA emulator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The RTL is used when compiling for hardware and simulation, and the emulation model is used when compiling for the FPGA emulator.
```

After having created the library file, the function in the library can be called from the SYCL kernel, without the need to know the hardware design or implementation details on underlying functions in the library.

Given a workable RTL module, one may need to apply some modifications in order to integrate it into oneAPI program.
1. An RTL module must use a single input Avalon® streaming interface. 
    Besides RTL library's interface, you must include a `clock` port, a `resetn` port, and Avalon® streaming interface input and output ports (that is: `ivalid`, `ovalid`, `iready`, `oready`) into your RTL module. 

> 

Reviewer: https://intel-my.sharepoint.com/:u:/p/paul_white/Edg_uRzLc29Eif4ZRT8r03oBRTUBrzPVTH4eZTyaD1XxTg?e=Zc5f16

Author: Graphic added

    > **Note**: The signal names must match the ones specified in the .xml file. An error occurs during library creation if a signal name is inconsistent.
    > You may find full list of RTL support constraints in [Restrictions and Limitations in RTL Support](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/oneapi/programming-guide/2023-2/restrictions-and-limitations-in-rtl-support.html).

> 2. RTL library’s characteristics needs to be specified. For example, this tutorial RTL library has specified the latency of the RTL component, that needs to be specified in object manifest file (.xml) under ATTRIBUTES. For other ATTRIBUTES-specific elements, do refer to [Object Manifest File Syntax of an RTL Module](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/oneapi/programming-guide/2023-2/object-manifest-file-syntax-of-an-rtl-library.html) for additional information.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. The RTL library’s characteristics need to be specified. For example, this tutorial RTL library has specified the latency of the RTL component, that needs to be specified in object manifest file (.xml) under ATTRIBUTES. For other ATTRIBUTES-specific elements, refer to [Object Manifest File Syntax of an RTL Module](https://www.intel.com/content/www/us/en/docs/oneapi/programming-guide/2023-2/object-manifest-file-syntax-of-an-rtl-library.html) for additional information.
```

Find more information about how to navigate this part of the code samples in the [FPGA top-level README.md](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md).
You can also find more information about [troubleshooting build errors](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#troubleshooting), [running the sample on the Intel® DevCloud](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#build-and-run-the-samples-on-intel-devcloud-optional), [using Visual Studio Code with the code samples](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#use-visual-studio-code-vs-code-optional), [links to selected documentation](/DirectProgramming/C++SYCL_FPGA/README.md#documentation), etc.

### Source Code Description

This tutorial includes two designs, each in separate sub-directories. Both designs multiply two 27-bit inputs together to produce a 54-bit output. In `part1_native`, a 27x27 multiplication is described with native C++ code. 
In `part2_libfunc_call` folder, RTL code is used to customize a DSP block to perform the multiplication more optimally. You can observe the impact on area utilization and performance by comparing the two designs.

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This code sample demonstrates how to use a simple RTL library in a simple FPGA IP produced with the Intel® oneAPI DPC++/C++ Compiler, since the area changes in this sample are quite small. You can use the `fpga_crossgen` and `fpga_libtool` commands to generate RTL libraries for multiarchitecture binary kernel (full system) designs as well.
```

> 1. An RTL module must use a single input Avalon® streaming interface. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. An RTL module must use a single Avalon® streaming input interface. Multiple input signals are allowed, but they must synchronize with a single ready/valid handshake.
```

>     Besides RTL library's interface, you must include a `clock` port, a `resetn` port, and Avalon® streaming interface input and output ports (that is: `ivalid`, `ovalid`, `iready`, `oready`) into your RTL module. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Your RTL library's interface must include a `clock` port, a `resetn` port, and a single Avalon® streaming interface input and single output port (that is: `ivalid`, `ovalid`, `iready`, `oready`). Your RTL module may have multiple input data signals, but only a single output.
```

   Note that generating an RTL library requires that an `xml` file and a C++ emulation model be provided in addition to the Verilog source code. The RTL is used when compiling for the hardware whereas the emulation model is used when the oneAPI program is run on the FPGA emulator. Examine the tutorial source code and the comments in `use_library.cpp` for more details.

>    > **Note**: When you are using special datatype (such as ac_intin this sample) in emulation model, you may safely ignore the warning complain about "incomplete type which could be incompatible with C". This warning would not affect the functionality of the design,

Reviewer: > **Note**: When you use special datatypes (such as `ac_int` in this sample) in the emulation model, the compiler may warn about "incomplete type which could be incompatible with C". This warning can be disabled with the `-Wno-return-type-c-linkage` flag.
> ```
> <put warning here>
> ```

Author: commit manually

   use_library.fpga_sim.exe
   set CL_CONTEXT_MPSIM_DEVICE_INTELFPGA=
   ```
3. Run the sample on the FPGA device (only if you ran `cmake` with `-DFPGA_DEVICE=<board-support-package>:<board-variant>`).
   ```
   use_library.fpga.exe
   ```

### Example of Output

```bash
PASSED: result is correct!
```

## Modifying Code Sample to implement DSP block customization in RTL module

In previous section, we have performed the basic function of byteswaping in RTL module.
With RTL module, we are able to customize DSP block behaviour in SYCL application and observe the impact on area utilization and performance.
In `use_rtl_dsp` design, we perform 27x27 multiplier with a native math implemation and a RTL-libary customised DSP version. 

To switch this sample to build with customised DSP RTL, you may change the SOURCE_FILES and LIB_FILENAME in the CMakeList.txt. 
   ```
   set(SOURCE_FILES src/use_rtl_dsp.cpp)
   set(TARGET_NAME use_rtl_dsp)
   set(LIB_FILENAME lib_rtl_dsp)
   ```
   > **Note**: The sample is defaultly targeting device Agilex family in `lib_rtl_dsp_spec.xml`. You will need to manually change the parameter in `lib_rtl_dsp_spec.xml` if you wish to target other devices.

> After modification, you may build and run the `use_rtl_dsp` sample just like `use_library`.

Reviewer: Please remove the old use_rtl cpp and verilog, we only want to demonstrate the DSP configuration.

## Read the Reports

Locate the `report.html` file in `use_rtl_dsp_report.prj` or `use_rtl_dsp.fpga_sim.prj`

Navigate to **Loop Analysis** (**Throughput Analysis > Loop Analysis**). In this viewer, you can find the latency of loops in the kernel. The latency of the customised DSP (KernelComputeRTL) should be lower than native design (KernelCompute).

Navigate to **System Resource Utilization Summary** (**Summary > System Resource Utilization Summary**)
By default, compiler area estimation tools assume that the RTL module area is 0.
Optionally, you may specifiy the FPGA resources that the RTL library use (for example, DSPS value="1") in object manifest file under RESOURCES attribute.
In this table, you can find the Compile Estimated: Kernel System used 2 DSP, one for each multiplier design.

In order to see the area utilization for each design implementation, you will have to compile only one implementation design at a time. See code comment for details.
The following table compared the estimated area usage after compiling each kernel separately.

|Compile Estimated: Kernel System

> |	 | Native Design | RTL with customised DSP

Reviewer: ```suggestion
| Resource | Native Design | RTL with customized DSP
```

|:--- 	 |:---           |:---
|ALM	 | 80.5          | 66
|-ALUT   | 161           | 132
|-REG    | 408           | 406
|-MLAB   | 0             | 0
|RAM     | 6             | 6

> |DSP     | 1             | 1

Reviewer: I'd prefer a screenshot of the table from the HLD report. This way the user knows what to look for.

### On a Linux* System

1. Change to the sample directory.
2. Build the program for Intel® Agilex® 7 device family, which is the default.
   ```
   mkdir build
   cd build
   cmake ..
   ```
   > **Note**: You can change the default target by using the command:
   >  ```
   >  cmake .. -DFPGA_DEVICE=<FPGA device family or FPGA part number>
   >  ```

>    >
>    > Alternatively, you can target an explicit FPGA board variant and BSP by using the following command:
>    >  ```
>    >  cmake .. -DFPGA_DEVICE=<board-support-package>:<board-variant>
>    >  ```
>    >
>    > You will only be able to run an executable on the FPGA if you specified a BSP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   >
   > Alternatively, you can target an explicit FPGA board variant and BSP by using the following command:
   >  ```
   >  cmake .. -DFPGA_DEVICE=<board-support-package>:<board-variant>
   >  ```
   >
   > You will only be able to run an executable on the FPGA if you specified a BSP.
```

we've made this design only work with RTL libraries, so remove this

Reviewer 2: Why can't this tutorial run on a BSP?

Edit: nvm, had a chat with Paul, this is because the samples uses Avalon streaming I/O

Author: removed these line manually in latest commit

   >
   > **Note**: The sample is defaultly targeting device Agilex family in `lib_rtl_dsp_spec.xml`. You will need to manually change the parameter in `lib_rtl_dsp_spec.xml` if you wish to target other devices.

3. Compile the design. (The provided targets match the recommended development flow.)

   1. Compile and run for emulation (fast compile time, targets emulates an FPGA device).
      ```
      make fpga_emu
      ```
   2. Generate the HTML optimization reports. (See [Read the Reports](#read-the-reports) below for information on finding and understanding the reports.)
      ```
      make report
      ```
   3. Compile for simulation (fast compile time, targets simulated FPGA device).
      ```
      make fpga_sim
      ```

>    4. Compile and run on FPGA hardware (longer compile time, targets an FPGA device).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   4. Compile for FPGA hardware (longer compile time, runs Intel® Quartus® Prime to get accurate area estimates).
```

      ```
      make fpga
      ```

### On a Windows* System

1. Change to the sample directory.
2. Build the program for the Intel® Agilex® 7 device family, which is the default.
   ```
   mkdir build
   cd build
   cmake -G "NMake Makefiles" ..
   ```
   > **Note**: You can change the default target by using the command:
   >  ```
   >  cmake -G "NMake Makefiles" .. -DFPGA_DEVICE=<FPGA device family or FPGA part number>
   >  ```

>    >
>    > Alternatively, you can target an explicit FPGA board variant and BSP by using the following command:
>    >  ```
>    >  cmake -G "NMake Makefiles" .. -DFPGA_DEVICE=<board-support-package>:<board-variant>
>    >  ```
>    >
>    > You will only be able to run an executable on the FPGA if you specified a BSP.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
removed multiarchitecture binary kernel support for this design for better area

Reviewer 3: ?

   >
   > **Note**: The sample is defaultly targeting device Agilex family in `lib_rtl_dsp_spec.xml`. You will need to manually change the parameter in `lib_rtl_dsp_spec.xml` if you wish to target other devices.

3. Compile the design. (The provided targets match the recommended development flow.)

   1. Compile for emulation (fast compile time, targets emulated FPGA device).
      ```
      nmake fpga_emu
      ```
   2. Generate the optimization report. (See [Read the Reports](#read-the-reports) below for information on finding and understanding the reports.)
      ```
      nmake report
      ```
   3. Compile for simulation (fast compile time, targets simulated FPGA device, reduced problem size).
      ```
      nmake fpga_sim
      ```

>    4. Compile for FPGA hardware (longer compile time, targets FPGA device):

Reviewer: ```suggestion
   4. Compile for FPGA hardware (longer compile time, runs Intel® Quartus® Prime to get accurate area estimates).
```

      ```
      nmake fpga
      ```
> **Note**: If you encounter any issues with long paths when compiling under Windows*, you may have to create your ‘build’ directory in a shorter path, for example c:\samples\build.  You can then run cmake from that directory, and provide cmake with the full path to your sample directory.

## Run the `use_library` Sample

### On Linux

1. Run the sample on the FPGA emulator (the kernel executes on the CPU).
   ```
   ./use_library.fpga_emu
   ```
2. Run the sample of the FPGA simulator device (the kernel executes on the CPU).
   ```
   CL_CONTEXT_MPSIM_DEVICE_INTELFPGA=1 ./use_library.fpga_sim
   ```

> 3. Run the sample on the FPGA device (only if you ran `cmake` with `-DFPGA_DEVICE=<board-support-package>:<board-variant>`).
>    ```
>    ./use_library.fpga
>    ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### On Windows

1. Run the sample on the FPGA emulator (the kernel executes on the CPU).
   ```
   use_library.fpga_emu.exe
   ```
2. Run the sample of the FPGA simulator device (the kernel executes on the CPU).
   ```
   set CL_CONTEXT_MPSIM_DEVICE_INTELFPGA=1
   use_library.fpga_sim.exe
   set CL_CONTEXT_MPSIM_DEVICE_INTELFPGA=
   ```

> 3. Run the sample on the FPGA device (only if you ran `cmake` with `-DFPGA_DEVICE=<board-support-package>:<board-variant>`).
>    ```
>    use_library.fpga.exe
>    ```

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```
